---
layout: post
title: "The Setup"
date: 2014-05-20 22:10:25
---

Last updated: 20 May 2014.

The most valuable thing I have on my computer, is probably my toolbox. My choice of software and my personal configuration means a lot to me. Every once in a while, people ask me my choice of software, so I wanted to create a webpage and write it all down, so I can direct people here.

## Hardware

* Processor: Intel® Core™2 Duo Processor E8200
* Graphics card: NVIDIA® GeForce® 9600 GT
* Memory: 4 GB RAM
* Keyboard & mouse: Not worth mentioning

## Software I

My entire setup is built on these:

* FreeBSD 10.0, both on desktop and server
* bspwm & sxhkd for window management and keybindings on X11
* mpd: music player daemon, yay!
* nginx
* rxvt-unicode, proud user
* scmpc: to scrobble tracks to Last.fm
* tmux: saves lives
* zsh, because bash is too conservative

# Software II

I use these programs on a daily basis.

* audacity: audio editing
* beets: awesome program that organizes my music library
* feh: image viewer
* firefox: guilty pleasure. (developer tools)
* git: version control
* lilypond: to engrave sheet music, can't live without this one
* mplayer: video player
* ncmpcpp: music player working on top of mpd. awesome.
* newsbeuter: the mutt of RSS/Atom feed reading
* opus-tools: my favorite lossy codec that I use everyday
* transmission: torrents. Tried rtorrent, but found transmission to be much more stable.
* vim: tried emacs, didn't like it
* w3m: rarely if I ever browse on the CLI

# Software III

These programs dump euphoria to /dev/brain. Those little programs that you use sometimes, and be amazed everytime you see it working.

* artget: grabs album arts from Last.fm. [shameless plug][artget]
* bar: a lightweight bar, really easy to set up!
* hiii: my wrapper for ii. [shameless plug][hiii]
* ii: the best IRC client ever. Read my [article.][ii]
* scrot: takes screenshots

[ii]: {{ site.url }}/p/ii
[hiii]: https://github.com/berkoz/hiii
[artget]: https://github.com/berkoz/artget
